# snATAC-ML-2025
Analysis code for VandenBosch et al. 2025

Non-coding variants present in cis-regulatory elements are significant in inherited retinal disease (IRD). Many GWAS studies identified regions of interest, frequently within non-coding regions of the genome. However, characterizing the functional impact of significant variants remains challenging. To improve identification of variants of interest, we implemented machine learning (ML) using single nucleus ATAC-seq data from the developing and mature human retina to systematically quantify cis-regulatory variant impact scores. We developed 18 distinct ML models on putative cis-regulatory elements. With these models, we predicted the impact of many non-coding variants. These models demonstrate accuracy over 90% and a high degree of cell class specificity. Variant Impact Predictions (VIP) highlight the value of specific sequences in non-coding regions of cells, specifically identifying disruptions in transcription factor (TF) motifs. Further, models recreate the impact of variants in cells when comparing VIPs to expression changes in variants of the Gnb3 mouse promoter. Finally, key models predicted the specific impact of IRD-associated variants from GWAS studies. The ML models generated in this study demonstrate the capacity for sn-epigenomic data to predict the impact of non-coding sequence variants. These models quickly screen through patient variants to prioritize the most potentially impactful variants in future analyses.
